SOURCE: https://www.cityofboston.gov/images_documents/BFHC%20Regulations_tcm3-45622.pdf
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-04 00:21 UTC
JURISDICTION: Boston, MA
CITES: Boston Fair Housing Commission Regulations, Reg. 1.01, 1.02(kk), 1.04(m) (amended Mar. 1, 2001); authority: City of Boston Code, Ordinances, Title 10, §§ 150-157 (1982) and St. 1994, c. 37
NOTE: Boston Fair Housing Commission amended regulations (adopted March 1, 2001), PDF published by the City of Boston on its legacy cityofboston.gov domain. A regulation, not the ordinance; the current codified ordinance chapter on municode was not checked.

AMENDED REGULATIONS
Adopted March 1, 2001
BOSTON FAIR HOUSING COMMISSION
One City Hall Plaza, Room 966
Boston, Massachusetts 02201
(617) 635-4408
Fax: (617) 635-3290
TTY: (617) 635-2541
ii
BOSTON FAIR HOUSING COMMISSION REGULATIONS
Table of Contents PAGE
Regulation 1: General Provisions
1.00 Authority 01
1.01 Discrimination Prohibited 01
1.02 Definitions 01
1.03 Persons and Property Covered 07
1.04 Unlawful Housing Practices 08
a. Refusal to Rent, Sell, Negotiate, Etc. 08
b. Discrimination in Conditions or Privileges 08
c. Restriction of Choices 08
d. Admission, Eligibility Requirements 09
e. Notices, Advertising 09
f. Representations of Unavailability 09
g. Real Estate Related Transactions, Loans 10
h. Blockbusting 11
i. Inquiries and Records 11
j. Multiple Listing, Brokers Services 12
k. Coercion, Intimidation and Threats 12
l. Reasonable Modifications, Accessibility 13
m. Source of Income Discrimination In Credit and Rentals 14
n. Other 14
1.05 Exemptions 15
Regulation 2: Practices and Procedures Before The
Boston Fair Housing Commission 16
2.01 Complaint 16
a. Who May File 16
b. Form and Filing 16
c. Time of Filing 17
d. Manner of Filing 17
e. Service Upon Respondent 17
f. Amendment of Complaints 17
g. Withdrawal of Complaints 18
h. Extension of Time Periods 18
i. Class Action 19
j. Prompt Judicial Relief 19
2.02 Parties
a. Intervention 20
b. Substitution 20
c. Consolidation 21
iii
2.03 Representation of Parties 21
a. Prior to Probable Cause 21
b. After Probable Cause 21
c. Other 21
2.04 Jurisdiction 22
2.05 Investigation 22
a. Commencement of Investigation 22
b. Assignment of Investigator 22
c. Service and Notification of Rights 22
d. Final Investigative Report 24
e. Confidentiality 25
f. Completion of Investigation 25
2.06 Conciliation and Settlement 26
a. Conciliation Efforts and Stay of Reports 26
b. Agreements 26
c. Confidentiality of Conciliation 27
d. Compliance Review 27
e. Reopening 27
2.07 Motions 28
a. Requesting and Objecting 28
b. Hearing 28
c. Ruling 28
2.08 Dispositions 28
a. Issuance of Final Investigative Report 28
1. Probable Cause 28
2. No Probable Cause 29
b. Reconsideration of Probable Cause 29
c. Request for Preliminary Hearing 30
d. Election of Civil Action 30
2.09 Public Hearing 32
a. Certification to Public Hearing 32
b. Hearing Commissioner 32
c. Respondents' Answer 34
d. Pre-hearing Conference 34
e. Continuances 35
f. Settlement After Commencement of Public
Hearing 35
g. Default 35
h. Discovery 36
i. Subpoenas 36
j. Transcript and Record 37
k. Stipulations 37
l. Evidence 38
m. Administrative Notice 38
n. Oral Argument 38
o. Witnesses 38
p. Briefs and Proposed findings of Fact 38
iv
q. Other Submissions 38
r. Assessments of Costs 39
s. Final Commission Order 39
t. Enforcement Powers After Public Hearing 39
u. Final Disposition of Complaint 40
2.10 Judicial Review 41
2.l1 Judicial Enforcement 41
2.12 Private Enforcement 41
2.13 Licensing of Brokers, Realtors 42
Regulation 3:Notice to be Given by Real Estate Brokers, Salespeople,
Title Insurance Companies and Lawyers; Records to be Retained 43
3.01 Giving of Notice to Tenants and Buyers 43
3.02 Giving of Notice to Lessors and Sellers 43
3.03 Housing Records to be Retained 44
3.04 Enforcement 45
1
REGULATION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.00 Authority
These Regulations were originally promulgated pursuant to City of Boston Code,
Ordinances, Title 10, Section 154 (1982) and are hereby amended in accordance
therewith and pursuant to St. 1994, c. 37, as amended by St. 1998, c. 165. This statute
empowers the Boston Fair Housing Commission to enforce the City of Boston's fair
housing laws in a manner substantially equivalent to enforcement under Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988,
(Title VIII) and to promulgate related regulations. Where any ambiguity may exist in the
substance or application of the Statute or these Regulations, as amended, they shall be
interpreted consistent with the provisions and related regulations of Title VIII and
Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General Laws.
1.01 Discrimination Prohibited
It is unlawful to deny equal access to or to discriminate in housing regardless of the
public or private source of denial or discrimination against an individual or group based
on race, color, religious creed, marital status, handicap, military status, children, national
origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual orientation or source of income.
1.02 Definitions: As used in these Regulations:
(a) “Age,” unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, means the
actual or perceived chronological age of an individual forty (40) years or older.
(b) “Aggrieved person” means any person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice or who believes he or she will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
(c) “Blockbusting” includes those prohibited practices contained in Section 1.04(h) of
these Regulations.
(d) "Boarder," "roomer" or "lodger" means a person living within a household who
pays consideration for such residence and does not occupy such space within the
household as an incident of employment therein.
(e) "Children" means one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18
years being domiciled with i) a parent or another person having legal custody of
2
such individual or individuals; or ii) the designee of such parent or other person
having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person.
For the purposes of those Unlawful Housing Practices listed in or incorporated by
reference in Section 1.04 of these Regulations, discrimination against persons with
children shall extend to women who are pregnant and to persons who are in the
process of securing legal custody of a child or children.
(f) "Commission" means the Boston Fair Housing Commission and "Commissioner"
means a commissioner of the Boston Fair Housing Commission.
(g) "Complainant" means the person who files a complaint alleging a discriminatory
housing practice.
(h) "Covered Multi-Family Dwelling" means buildings consisting of four or more
dwelling units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and ground floor
dwellings in other buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units.
(i) "Discriminatory Housing Practice" means an act that is unlawful under Section
804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Fair Housing Act or a discriminatory housing practice
that is unlawful under GL c. 151B, Section 4 and the Statute, Section 5. (The
"Unlawful Housing Practices" listed in these Regulations at Section 1.04 are
generally categorized and based upon the specific prohibitions under the Fair
Housing Act and/or GL c. 151B, Section 4. These "Unlawful Housing Practices"
are therefore an inclusive list, which incorporates by reference all of the specific
"Discriminatory Housing Practices" as defined above).
(j) "Dwelling" means a building, structure or portion thereof containing housing
accommodations.
(k) "Dwelling unit" means housing for the exclusive use of persons who maintain a
common household.
(l) "Duly Authorized Representative" means a person authorized to represent another
by a written authorization document either signed by the person represented or in
a form otherwise recognized by law.
(m) "Executive Director" means the executive officer of the Commission as appointed
by the Commission.
3
(n) “Fair Housing Act" means Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended
by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (42 U.S.C. 3600-3620).
(o) "Family" includes a single individual.
(p) "Final Commission Order" means a decision of the full Commission, which shall
require three votes for passage. Settlement agreements pursuant to Section
2.06(b) shall constitute Final Commission Orders.
(q) "Handicap" means, with respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment
which substantially limits one or more major life activities; a record of such an
impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment. This term does not
include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. As used in
this definition:
(1) "Major life activities" means functions such as caring for one's self,
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
learning and working.
(2) "Has a record of such an impairment" means has a history of, or
has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
(3) "Is regarded as having an impairment" means:
(i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not
substantially limit one or more major life activities but that
is treated by another person as constituting such limitation
(ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more major life activities only as a result of
the attitudes of others toward such impairment; or has none
of the impairments defined in paragraph (a) of this
definition but is treated by another person as having such an
impairment.
For the purposes of those "Unlawful Practices" listed in or incorporated by
reference under Section 1.04(a)(b)(i) and (l), of these Regulations, "handicap"
refers to that of a) the buyer or renter, b) a person residing in or intending to reside
4
in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or c) any person
associated with that person.
(r) "Hearing Commissioner" means a Commissioner assigned to preside at a Hearing
pursuant to Section 2.09(b).
(s) "Housing or Housing Accommodations" includes any building, structure, or
portion thereof which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied, as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more
human beings and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of any such building structure or portion thereof. This
shall not include a hospital, convent, monastery, asylum or public institution.
(t) "Housing for Older Persons" in connection with the provisions regarding children
at 1.05(c) means:
(1) Housing provided under any State or Federal program that the
Secretary determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly
persons as defined in the State or Federal program;
(2) Housing intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of
age or older; or
(3) Housing intended and operated for occupancy by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit, and which meets the requirements
of the Regulations promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development. See 24 CFR PART 100, Subpart E.
The status of "age" and "children" shall not apply to residency in Housing for
Older Persons.
(u) "Housing Law" refers to local, state and federal housing law, specifically, the
ordinance, the Statute, GL c. 151B and the Fair Housing Act.
(v) "Marital Status" means the actual or supposed state of being or having been
unmarried, married or separated as defined under Massachusetts law. Unmarried
includes persons who are single, divorced or widowed.
(w) "Military Status" means the actual or supposed condition of being, not being,
having been or not having been in the service of the military.
5
(x) "Multiple Dwelling" means a dwelling which is usually occupied for permanent
residence purposes and which is either rented, leased, let or hired out, to be
occupied as the residence or home of three or more families living independently
of each other. It shall not be deemed to include a hospital, convent, monastery,
asylum or public institution.
(y) "Ordinance," unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, means
City of Boston Code, Ordinances, Title 10, Sections 150-157 (1982), as amended.
(z) "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and
the Commonwealth and all political subdivisions and boards and commissions
thereof.
(aa) "Personal Service" means handing a copy of the document to the person to be
served or leaving a copy of the document with a person of suitable age and
discretion at the last known place of business, residence or usual abode of the
person to be served. A Commission staff member of the Commission may
provide personal service.
(bb) "Person in the Business of Selling or Renting Dwellings" means any person who:
(1) Within the preceding twelve months has participated as principal in
three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or
any interest therein;
(2) Within the preceding twelve months, has participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing
sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or
rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(3) Is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy
by or occupied by five or more families.
(cc) “Plaintiff” means the City of Boston acting by and through the Fair Housing
Commission.
(dd) “Probable Cause" means a conclusion, after appropriate investigation, that there is
sufficient evidence upon which a fact finder could form a reasonable belief that it
6
is more probable than not that the Respondent committed an unlawful practice. In
making this finding, disputes involving genuine issues of material fact are to be
reserved for determination at a Hearing.
(ee) "Racial Designation" shall mean "white (non-Hispanic)," "black (non-Hispanic),"
"American Indian/Alaska Native," "Hispanic" and "Asian/Pacific Islander."
(ff) "Reasonable Attorney's Fees and Costs" includes the reasonable expenses of
expert witnesses, the reasonable cost of any study, analysis, engineering report,
test or project which is found by the court to be necessary for the preparation of
the party's case, and reasonable attorney's fees. The amount of fees and costs
awarded shall be based upon the prevailing market rate for the kind and quality of
services furnished.
(gg) "Religious Creed" shall mean the actual or supposed faith, belief or moral
philosophy of an individual or lack thereof.
(hh) “Residential Real Estate Related Transactions” means
(1) The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance;
(2) For purchasing, constructing, insuring, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
(3) Secured by residential real estate; or
(4) The selling, brokering, insuring or appraising of residential real
property.
(ii) "Respondent" means
(1) The person or other entity accused in a complaint of a
discriminatory housing practice; and
(2) Any other person or entity identified in the course of investigation
and notified as required with respect to Respondents so identified under
these Regulations at Section 2.05(c)(2).
(jj) "Sexual Orientation" means the actual or supposed heterosexuality,
homosexuality, or bisexuality of an individual, but shall not include persons
whose sexual preference involves minor children as the sex object. "Sexual
7
Preference," as used in the Ordinance, shall have the same meaning as "Sexual
Orientation.”
(kk) "Source of Income" shall mean public assistance recipiency. Source of income
shall not include income derived from criminal activity.
(ll) "Statute," unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, means St.
1994, c. 37, which codifies as state law the Home Rule Petition entitled "An Act
Empowering the Boston Fair Housing Commission to Impose Civil Penalties and
Enforce by Judicial Power the Provisions of Title VIII.
(mm) “Statute of Limitations,” unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context, means the one hundred eighty (180) day deadline for the filing of a
complaint under Section 154 of the Ordinance. The term “one hundred eighty
(180) days after the occurrence of the alleged discriminatory practice" shall be
interpreted to mean within one hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged
discriminatory event, or, in the case of a continuing discriminatory practice,
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the termination of the alleged practice.
1.03 Persons and Property Covered
(a) These Regulations shall apply but are not limited to any person, corporation,
association, firm or enterprise engaged in the business of selling or renting
dwellings; or ownership, rental, sale, lease, management, construction or
rehabilitation of housing accommodations; or appraisal of residential real
property; or any person, bank, building and loan association, firm or enterprise
whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of residential real estate
related transactions.
(b) All housing accommodations not expressly excluded by these Regulations or
housing law in the City of Boston are subject to these Regulations.
(c) Nothing in these Regulations shall apply to housing or land intended or suitable
for housing that is specifically excluded from coverage by the Ordinance.
(d) Nothing in these Regulations shall apply to the leasing or rental to two or fewer
roomers, boarders, or lodgers.
8
1.04 Unlawful Housing Practices:
The following Unlawful Housing Practices are based upon those specific discriminatory
housing practices made unlawful under Sections 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Fair Housing
Act, Massachusetts General Law chapter 151B, Section 4 and St. 1994, c. 37 as amended
by St. 1988, c. 165 which are incorporated herein by reference. These Unlawful Housing
Practices shall include, but are not limited to, the following prohibited acts:
(a) R EFUSAL TO RENT, SELL OR NEGOTIATE, OR TO DENY ACCESS
It is unlawful to refuse to rent, lease or sell, to refuse to negotiate for the sale or
rental or to deny access or otherwise make unavailable to any person, housing or
land intended or suitable for housing because of race, color, religious creed,
marital status, handicap, military status, children, national origin, sex, age,
ancestry, sexual orientation or source of income. For the purposes of this
"Unlawful Practice," "handicap" refers to that of 1) the buyer or renter; 2) a person
residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made
available; or 3) any person associated with that person.
(b) D ISCRIMINATION IN TERMS, CONDITIONS, PRIVILEGES
It is unlawful to discriminate against any person because of race, color, religious
creed, marital status, handicap, military status, children, national origin, sex, age,
ancestry, sexual orientation or source of income, in terms, conditions or privileges
of such housing or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection
therewith. For the purposes of this "Unlawful Practice," "handicap" refers to that
of 1) the buyer or renter; 2) a person residing in or intending to reside in that
dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or 3) any person associated with
that person.
(c) R ESTRICTION OF CHOICES
It is unlawful because of race, color, religious creed, marital status, handicap,
military status, children, national origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, or
source of income to restrict or attempt to restrict the choices of a person by word
or conduct in connection with seeking, negotiating for, buying or renting a
9
dwelling so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or
to discourage or obstruct choices in a community, neighborhood or development.
(d) A DMISSION, ELIGIBILITYREQUIREMENTS
It is unlawful to discriminate on the basis of race, color, religious creed, marital
status, handicap, military status, children, national origin, sex, age, ancestry,
sexual orientation, or source of income in determining whether a person satisfies
any occupancy, admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership or other
requirement or condition which applicants must meet in order to be provided
housing.
(e) N OTICES, ADVERTISING
It is unlawful to make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement, including "For Rent" and "For Sale" signs
and listings with respect to the sale or rental of housing or land, that indicates any
preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religious creed,
marital status, handicap, military status, children, national origin, sex, age,
ancestry, sexual orientation or source of income, or that indicates an intention to
make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. These prohibitions shall
apply to all written or oral notices or statements by a person engaged in the sale or
rental of a dwelling. Written notices and statements include any applications,
flyers, brochures, deeds, signs, banners, posters, billboards or any documents used
with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling.
(f) R EPRESENTATIONS OF UNAVAILABILITY
It is unlawful to represent to any person because of race, color, religious creed,
marital status, handicap, military status, children, national origin, sex, age,
ancestry, sexual orientation or source of income that no suitable housing
accommodation is available for inspection, sale or rental within a particular
neighborhood or area when such a suitable housing accommodation within the
particular neighborhood or area is in fact so available; or similarly to fail to
disclose or offer to show all properties listed or held for sale or rent within a
requested price or rental range, regardless of location, or to make false
10
representations regarding the listing, prospective listing, sale or prospective sale
of any housing accommodation.
(g) R EAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTIONS, LOANS, APPRAISALS, INSURANCE
It is unlawful for any person whose business includes granting mortgage loans or
engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to discriminate against any
person in the granting of any mortgage loan or in making available such a
transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a loan or transaction because of
race, color, religious creed, marital status, handicap, military status, children,
national origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual orientation or source of income. Such
transactions shall include, but are not limited to:
(1) The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other
financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, insuring, improving,
repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or the making or purchasing of loans
or the provision of other financial assistance secured by residential real
estate; or
(2) The selling, brokering, insuring or appraising of residential real
estate.
In the case of age, the following shall not be an unlawful practice:
(1) An inquiry of age for the purpose of determining a pertinent
element of credit worthiness;
(2) The use of an empirically derived credit system which considers
age; provided, however, that such a system is based on demonstrably and
statistically sound data; and provided further, that such system does not
assign a negative factor or score to any applicant who has reached age
sixty-two;
(3) The offering of credit life insurance or credit disability insurance,
in conjunction with any mortgage loan to a limited age group;
(4) The failure or refusal to grant any mortgage loan the duration of
which exceeds the life expectancy of the applicant as determined by the
most recent Individual Annuity Mortality Table.
11
Nothing in this Unlawful Practice prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other
than those herein above proscribed.
(h) B LOCKBUSTING
It is unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly induce or attempt to induce or
prevent or attempt to prevent the sale, purchase, or rental of housing
accommodations by:
(1) Implicit or explicit representations regarding the entry or
prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a
particular race, color, religious creed, marital status, handicap, military
status, national origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual orientation, source of
income or a person or persons having a child; or implicit or explicit
representations regarding the effects or consequences of any such entry or
prospective entry.
(2) Making any unrequested contact or communication with any
person or persons, initiated by any means, for the purpose of so inducing
or attempting to induce the sale, purchase, or rental of any housing
accommodations when he/she knew or, in the exercise of reasonable care,
should have known that such unrequested solicitation would reasonably be
associated by the persons solicited with the entry into the neighborhood of
a person or persons of a particular race, color, religious creed, marital
status, handicap, military status, national origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual
orientation, source of income or a person or persons having a child.
(i) I NQUIRIES AND RECORDS
It is unlawful to cause to be made any written or oral inquiry or record, except
those required to be submitted to the Commission, the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, the Massachusetts Commission Against
Discrimination or the Massachusetts Executive Office of Communities and
Development, as part of an affirmative marketing proposal or permitted under 24
CFR Part 100.202 (c)(1-5) (see below) concerning the race, color, religious creed,
12
marital status, handicap, military status, children, national origin, sex, age,
ancestry, sexual orientation or source of income of any person or group of persons
seeking to rent, lease, or buy housing or land. For the purposes of this "Unlawful
Practice," "handicap" refers to that of 1) the buyer or renter; 2) a person residing
in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available;
or 3) any person associated with that person. Pursuant to 24 CFR Part
100.202(c)(1-5) (see below) the following inquiries are permitted, provided these
inquiries are made of all applicants:
(1) Inquiry into an applicant's ability to meet the requirements of
ownership or tenancy;
(2) Inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for a
dwelling available only to persons with handicaps or to persons with a
particular type of handicap;
(3) Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is
qualified for a priority available to persons with handicaps or to persons
with a particular type of handicap;
(4) Inquiring whether an applicant for a dwelling is a current illegal
abuser or addict of a controlled substance;
(5) Inquiring whether an applicant has been convicted of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
(j) M ULTIPLE LISTING, BROKERS SERVICES
It is unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any
multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service
organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to
discriminate against any such person in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership or participation because of race, color, religious creed, marital status,
handicap, military status, children, national origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual
orientation or source of income.
(k) C OERCION, INTIMIDATION, THREATS
It is unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, interfere with or injure; or to attempt
13
to coerce, intimidate, threaten, interfere with, or injure any person because of his
or her race, color, religious creed, marital status, handicap, military status,
children, national origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual orientation or source of
income, and his or her selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or
negotiating for the sale or rental of housing or land; or because of his or her
compliance with housing law; or because he or she has taken affirmative action in
the area of fair housing; or because he or she has filed a complaint under housing
law; or exercised or encouraged or aided another in the exercise of any right
granted or protected by housing law.
(l) R EASONABLE MODIFICATIONS AND ACCESSIBILITY FOR HANDICAPPED
It is unlawful to discriminate on the basis of handicap by:
(1) Refusing to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied
by the handicapped person, if the modifications may be necessary to afford
the handicapped person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the
case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so,
condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore
the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
(2) Refusing to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to
afford a handicapped person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or
(3) In connection with the design and construction of covered
multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure
to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that:
(i) The dwellings have at least one building entrance on an
accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so because of
the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site;
14
(ii) With respect to dwellings with a building entrance on an
accessible route:
A) The public use and common use portions of the
dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by
handicapped persons;
B) All the doors designed to allow passage into and
within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage
by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
C) All premises within covered multi family dwelling
units contain an accessible route into and through the
dwellings; light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and
other environmental controls are in accessible locations;
there are reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow
later installation of grab bars; and there are usable kitchens
and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can
maneuver about the space. Compliance with (C) above will
be satisfied if the housing provider complies with the
appropriate requirements of the American National
Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility
and usability for physically handicapped people (commonly
cited as "ANSI" A117.1-1986).
For the purposes of this "Unlawful Practice," "handicap" refers to that of a) the
buyer or renter; b) a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is sold, rented or made available; or c) any person associated with that person.
(m) S OURCE OF INCOME DISCRIMINATION IN CREDIT AND RENTALS
It is an unlawful practice for any person furnishing credit services or rental
accommodations to discriminate against any individual because of the individual's
source of income or because of any requirement of such source of income.
(n) The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited conduct in paragraphs (a-m) of
this section does not limit the generality of the prohibition of Section 1.01 above.
15
1.05 Exemptions
(a) Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit a religious organization, association or
society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society,
from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates
for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on
account of race, color, religious creed, marital status, handicap, military status,
children, national origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual preference or source of income.
(b) Nothing in these Regulations concerning the Commission's powers of enforcement
granted under the Statute, Section 7, shall apply to owners of housing
accommodations who occupy as their permanent residence a dwelling unit in any
building or structure containing one, two, three or four dwelling units, except,
consistent with the Fair Housing Act, Chapter 151B of the General Laws and the
Ordinance, nothing in Section 7 of the Statute or these Regulations shall be
construed to permit such owners to engage in discriminatory advertising (Unlawful
Practice (e), herein), discriminatory residential real estate related transactions
(Unlawful Practice (g), herein), or coercion, intimidation or threats (Unlawful
Practice (k), herein).
(c) Nothing in these Regulations prohibits conduct against a person because such
person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of
the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802). Nothing in these Regulations
regarding "children" status shall apply with respect to Housing for Older Persons as
defined under the Fair Housing Act Section 807(b)(2) and herein at Section 102(t).
The Commission expressly adopts the federal regulations under the Fair Housing
Act found at 24 CFR 100, Subpart E for application of this exemption. Nothing in
these Regulations regarding "age" status shall apply with regard to residency in such
Housing for Older Persons. Nothing in these Regulations shall limit the application
16
of reasonable local, state or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of
persons permitted to occupy a dwelling.
REGULATION 2: PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE BEFORE THE BOSTON FAIR
HOUSING COMMISSION
2.01 Complaints
(a) Who may file
(1) Any person aggrieved by an alleged unlawful discriminatory
housing practice;
(2) Any duly authorized representative of a person aggrieved by an
alleged discriminatory housing practice; or
(3) The Commission, through its Executive Director or an individual
Commissioner.
(b) Form and Filing
(1) Any complaint shall be in writing and shall be signed and verified
by the Complainant. Verification for this purpose means:
(i) The signing of the complaint under oath before a notary
public. The Commission will provide notary public
services at no charge; or
(ii) A signature accompanied by the statement: “I declare
under the pains and penalties of perjury that the foregoing
is true and correct.”
(iii) The signature and verification may be made at any time
during the investigation.
(2) The complaint shall contain the following information:
(i) The name and address of the Complainant,
(ii) The name and address, if known, of the person alleged to
have committed the unlawful discriminatory housing
practice complained of (hereafter the Respondent),
17
(iii) A concise statement of the alleged discriminatory housing
practice(s),
(iv) The date(s) on which such alleged unlawful discriminatory
acts occurred or, where such acts are of a continuing nature,
the period of time during which such acts occurred, and
(v) If appropriate, a statement indicating that the complaint is a
class action as provided in Section 2.01.
(3) The original complaint shall be filed with the Commission; a copy
of the complaint shall be transmitted by first class mail to the
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination.
(c) Time of Filing
Complaints of discriminatory housing practices must be filed within one hundred
eighty (180) days after their occurrence or the last date of an alleged continuing
discriminatory housing practice.
(d) Manner of Filing
The complaint may be filed in person or by mail, addressed to the offices of the
Commission.
(e) Service Upon Respondent
Within ten (10) days of the filing of a complaint, the Commission shall serve a
copy of the complaint upon the Respondent either by certified mail, return receipt
requested, at his/her last known address or place of business or by personal
service. (See also Service and Notification of Rights, Section 2.05 (c) herein).
(f) Amendment of Complaints
A complaint may be amended by the Complainant or by the Executive Director or
the Hearing Commissioner as of right at any time prior to fifteen (15) days before
the Public Hearing. Thereafter it may be amended for good cause at the discretion
of the Hearing Commissioner. The Respondent shall be served by regular mail
with the amended complaint prior to filing with the Commission, and certification
of such service shall be a prerequisite to filing with the Commission. All
amendments shall relate back to the original filing date. When a complaint is
18
amended after an answer has been filed, Respondent may amend his/her answer
within ten (10) days after notice of an amendment, or upon the first day of the
Public Hearing, whichever period may be shorter. In addition, the Respondent
may amend the answer once as a matter of course at any time prior to fifteen (15)
days before the initial day of the Public Hearing.
(g) Withdrawal of Complaints
A complaint may be withdrawn by the Complainant with the consent of the
Commission. A Request to Withdraw shall be in writing and signed by the
Complainant or his/her duly authorized representative. Such a request may be
granted by the Executive Director or a Commissioner, whereupon all other parties
shall be notified by regular mail. The Commission's right to file a complaint
based upon the same facts shall not be affected by any private party's withdrawal,
and any such Commission-initiated complaint shall relate back to the date of filing
of the individual complaint.
(h) Extension of Time Periods
Subject to the provisions of subsection (3) below, when an act is required or
permitted within a specified time period under these rules or an Order of the
Commission, the Executive Director or a Commissioner may:
(1) If a request is made before the expiration of the time period, extend
that period in his/her discretion; or
(2) If a written request is made after the expiration of the time period,
extend that period if the failure to act was due to excusable neglect or for
good cause;
(3) Exercise discretion in the extension of time periods except for the
following time limits:
(i) Filing of a complaint within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the occurrence or termination of the alleged
discriminatory housing practice;
(ii) Notification to Respondent within ten (10) days;
19
(iii) Commencement of investigation of the complaint within
thirty (30) days;
(iv) Completion of the investigation within one hundred (100)
days, unless impracticable (See Section 2.05(e));
(v) Election of a judicial action as an alternative to an
administrative proceeding within twenty (20) days after
receipt of a Probable Cause finding; and
(vi) Final disposition of the complaint within one (1) year of
receipt, unless impracticable (See Section 2.09 (u)).
(i) Class Action
The Commission may grant permission for a case to proceed as a class action
before or during investigation if the following prerequisites are met:
(1) The class is so numerous that joinder of all members is
impracticable;
(2) There are questions of law or fact common to the class;
(3) The claims or defenses of the representative parties are typical of
the claims or defenses of the class;
(4) The representative parties will fairly and adequately protect the
interest of the class; and
(5) The public interest is served by a class proceeding.
(j) Prompt Judicial Relief
Whenever, after the filing of a complaint, the Executive Director or a
Commissioner deems it necessary, in the interest of justice, to preserve the rights
of the aggrieved party(ies) and/or, the Commission's right to investigate
complaints and afford relief, he/she may authorize the Director of Investigations,
other Commission staff or the Corporation Counsel of the City of Boston to seek
prompt judicial action in the form of appropriate preliminary, temporary and/or
injunctive relief, including orders or decrees against the Respondent restraining
the selling, renting or otherwise making unavailable to the Complainant any
housing accommodations with respect to which the complaint is made pending the
20
final finding of the proceedings. This judicial action shall be in the form of a
petition filed in Suffolk Superior Court or the Boston Housing Court departments
of the Trial Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
2.02 Parties
(a) Intervention
(1) Intervention of Right: Any aggrieved person may file a request for
intervention to participate as a Complainant or Respondent under this
section. Intervention shall be permitted by the Commission under the
following circumstances:
(i) The request is timely filed. Requests for intervention
submitted within 30 days after the receipt of a Final
Investigative Report containing a finding of probable cause
shall be considered timely filed; and
(ii) The intervenor is the aggrieved person on whose behalf the
claimed interest in the property or transaction that is the
subject of the finding of Probable Cause may not be
otherwise adequately protected by existing parties.
(2) Discretionary Intervention: At any other time during the
proceeding, any person not originally a party to the proceeding may be
permitted to intervene as a Complainant or Respondent if, in the judgment
of the Executive Director or the Hearing Commissioner:
(i) Such action will assist in the orderly disposition or
presentation of the case, and
(ii) Such person asserts a claim or defense having common
questions of law or fact with the main proceeding.
(b) Substitution
The Executive Director or the Hearing Commissioner may, upon his/her own
motion or upon the motion of any party, at any time during any proceeding or
investigation, make such substitution, joinder, or amendment of parties as the
21
interests of justice and convenience may require. All parties shall be duly notified
of any substitution.
(c) Consolidation
The Executive Director or the Hearing Commissioner may, upon his/her own
motion or upon motion of any party, order proceedings involving a common
question of law or fact to be consolidated for investigation, conciliation, or
Hearing on any or all matters at issue in such proceedings.
2.03 Representation of Parties
(a) Prior to Probable Cause finding
Prior to a finding that there is Probable Cause to believe the allegations of the
complaint, no member of the Commission's Commission staff shall act as an
advocate for either the Complainant or the Respondent. This prohibition shall not
apply where the Commissioner(s), Executive Director, Director of Investigations
or other Commission staff designated by a Commissioner or the Executive
Director, deems it necessary, in the interest of justice, to preserve the rights of the
aggrieved party and/or the agency's right to investigate complaints and afford
relief, to seek (through its Director of Investigations, the Corporation Counsel of
the City of Boston or other Commission staff designated by a Commissioner or
the Executive Director) appropriate injunctive relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(b) After Probable Cause finding
After a finding is made that there is Probable Cause to credit the allegation of the
complaint, unless otherwise prescribed (See Section 2.08(d) Judicial Election), the
Commission's Director of Investigations or other Commission staff designated by
a Commissioner or the Executive Director shall act as counsel for the
Commission in support of the Complainant during the proceedings.
(c) Other
Any party may be represented by counsel or duly authorized representative at any
stage in proceedings before the Commission.
22
2.04 Jurisdiction
(a) General
The Commission has jurisdiction to conduct investigations of complaints
regarding the denial of equal access to and discrimination in housing (regardless
of the private or public source of such denial or discrimination) where such denial
or discrimination against either a group or individual is based on race, color,
religious creed, marital status, handicap, military status, children, national origin,
sex, age, ancestry, sexual orientation or source of income; to eliminate the
presence in the City of Boston of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry or discrimination
in the area of housing; and to enforce the provisions of St. 1993, c. 37, as
amended by St. 1998, c. 165, and the Ordinance in a manner substantially
equivalent to enforcement under Title VIII including but not limited to the award
of compensatory damages, the imposition of civil penalties and the authorization
to seek injunctive relief and the award of attorney’s fees and costs.
2.05 Investigation
(a) Commencement of Investigation
The Commission shall commence the investigation within thirty (30) days of
receipt of the complaint.
(b) Assignment of Investigator
Within five (5) days of the filing of a complaint, a member of the Commission's
investigation Commission staff shall be assigned to investigate it.
(c) Service and Notification of Rights
(1) Upon the filing of a complaint, each Complainant shall be notified
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal service. The notice
shall:
(i) Acknowledge the date that the complaint was accepted for
filing;
(ii) Identify the alleged discriminatory housing practice; and
(iii) Advise the Complainant of the time limits applicable to
complaint processing and procedural rights and obligations
23
including but not limited to three choices of forum under
the housing law: 1) the right to commence a civil action in
federal court within two years after the occurrence or
termination of the alleged discriminatory housing practice,
and that this two year time period excludes any time during
which a proceeding is pending under this part; 2) the right
to commence a civil action in state court within three years
after the occurrence or termination of the alleged
discriminatory housing practice, and that this three year
period does not exclude the time a proceeding is pending;
3) the right to commence a civil action in state court within
one year of the alleged discrimination without filing a
complaint at the Commission.
(iv) Advise Complainant that retaliation against any person
because he or she has made a complaint, testified or
assisted or participated in an investigation is prohibited as a
discriminatory housing practice.
(2) Within ten (10) days of the filing of the complaint, each Respondent shall
be notified by certified mail, return receipt requested or personal service. The
notice shall:
(i) Acknowledge the date that the complaint was accepted for
filing;
(ii) Identify the alleged discriminatory housing practice and
include a copy of the complaint;
(iii) Advise the Respondent of the time limits applicable to
complaint processing and procedural rights and obligations,
including the opportunity to submit a reply within ten (10)
days of receipt of the notice;
(iv) Advise Respondent of the Complainant's right to
commence a civil action (1) in federal court within two
24
years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged
discriminatory housing practice, and that this two year time
period excludes any time during which a proceeding is
pending under this part; 2) in state court within three years
after the occurrence or termination of the alleged
discriminatory housing practice, and that this three year
period does not exclude the time a proceeding is pending;
and in state within one year of the alleged discrimination
without filing a complaint at the commission.
(v) Advise Respondent that retaliation against any person
because he or she has made a complaint, testified or
assisted or participated in an investigation is prohibited as a
discriminatory housing practice.
(d) Final Investigative Report
The Commission staff shall make prompt investigation of the complaint and,
unless the complaint has been withdrawn, or a Pre-determination Settlement
Agreement has been signed, shall issue a Final Investigative Report, signed by the
Executive Director. This report shall be full and complete and shall include
findings of fact and, with respect to each separate allegation of an unlawful
discriminatory housing practice, a finding that:
(1) No Jurisdiction exists over the parties or subject matter of the
complaint;
(2) There is Probable Cause to believe the allegations of the
complaint;
(3) There is No Probable Cause to believe the allegations of the
complaint; or
(4) The case has been Closed Administratively due to inability to
locate a party, unreasonable refusal by the Complainant to cooperate with
processing of the case including failure to provide information or materials
or responses to the Respondent's submissions which are necessary for
25
investigation of the case, independent decision of the Complainant not to
proceed, or the loss of the right to proceed, with further actions and
commencement of a trial pursuant to the provisions of these Regulations.
Issuance of the Final Investigative Report and related Notifications shall
be in accordance with Section 2.08 herein.
(e) Confidentiality
All information and documents received during investigation shall be confidential
and for the internal use of the Commission's Commission staff only, except that:
(1) Upon service upon the Respondent, the complaint shall be a public
document;
(2) The Complainant, Respondent and witnesses shall each be entitled
to copies of their own affidavits or other signed documents; and
(3) Upon signing of the Final Investigative Report by the Executive
Director, that Report and all sworn affidavits shall be public documents,
except as provided in Section 2.06 (a) (2), below. The Executive Director
may, for good cause, which shall be stated in the Final Investigative
Report, conceal the identity of any witness or person other than the
Complainant or Respondent, subject to the limitation that if any such
person will testify at a Public Hearing or if any affidavit is entered into
evidence, then that person's identity shall be discoverable pursuant to
Section 2.09 (h), below.
(f) Completion of the Investigation
The investigation of the complaint shall be completed within one hundred (100)
days after its receipt, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the Commission is
unable to complete the investigation within one hundred (100) days, it shall notify
the Complainant and Respondent in writing and state the reasons for the delay.
26
2.06 Conciliation and Settlement
(a) Conciliation Efforts and Stay of Reports
Conciliation shall include the attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint,
or by the investigation of a complaint, through informal negotiations involving the
aggrieved person.
(1) At any time the Commission may endeavor to eliminate the
unlawful practice complained of by mediation, conciliation or other
appropriate action.
(2) When it appears to the Director of Investigations or other
Commission staff designated by a Commissioner or the Executive
Director, that a Probable Cause finding is likely to issue, he/she may
schedule a conference to endeavor to reach a just resolution of the
complaint through mediation, conciliation and persuasion. If such
conference is scheduled, the parties shall be served written notice of the
date, time and purpose.
(3) The Executive Director may stay the signing of the Final
Investigative Report and maintain its confidentiality for ten days after
completion, if in his/her judgment this would assist in bringing the
Complainant, Respondent and Commission to settlement through
conciliation or mediation.
(b) Agreements
The investigating Commission staff shall attempt to achieve just resolutions of
complaints and to obtain assurances, where appropriate, that the Respondent will
satisfactorily remedy any violations of the rights of the person aggrieved and will
act to prevent such violations in the future. Such agreements may be obtained at
any time during the proceedings. Any agreement arising out of mediation or
conciliation efforts by the Commission shall be an agreement between the
Respondent and the Complainant and shall be subject to the approval of the
Commission.
27
(1) The terms of such agreements shall be reduced to writing, signed by
both parties and by the Executive Director on behalf of the Commission or
by a Commissioner. Such agreements shall seek to protect the interests of
the Complainant, other persons similarly situated, and the public interest.
(2) Such agreements shall be known as:
(i) Pre-determination Settlement Agreements, when signed
before a Final Investigative Report is issued;
(ii) Conciliation Agreements, when signed after a Final
Investigative Report is issued; or
(iii) Consent Orders, when signed after commencement of
Public Hearing.
(c) Confidentiality of Conciliation Conferences
Nothing said or done as a part of the Commission's efforts at conciliation may be
made public without the written consent of all parties involved. The written terms
of any settlement agreement, however, shall be a public document unless sealed
from public view by agreement of all parties and a finding by vote of three (3)
Commissioners that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of the
housing law.
(d) Compliance Review
The investigating Commission staff may, from time to time, review compliance
with an agreement and may, upon a finding of non-compliance, take such
enforcement action as is provided for under the settlement agreement or as may
otherwise be appropriate.
(e) Reopening
The Commission retains jurisdiction after execution of any agreement. Upon
motion of the Complainant, the Respondent or Commission staff asserting that a
Pre-determination Settlement Agreement, Consent Order or Conciliation
Agreement has not been complied with or requires modification, a Commissioner
may in his or her discretion reopen the case and certify it to a public Hearing to
28
determine whether the agreement has been complied with or requires modification
and to take such further action as may be appropriate.
2.07 Motions
(a) Requesting and Objecting
A party may request of the Commission any Order or action not inconsistent with
law. Such a request shall be called a motion. Motions may be made in writing at
any time or may be made orally at a Public Hearing. Each motion shall set forth
the grounds for the desired Order or action and state whether a Hearing is desired.
A party opposing a motion may file written objections to the allowance of the
motion within 14 days and may, if desired, request a Hearing.
(b) Hearing
The Director of Investigations, the Hearing Commissioner, or other Commission
staff designated by a Commissioner or the Executive Director shall determine
whether a Hearing on the motion is warranted and give at least three days' notice
of the time and place for Hearing. A motion may be ruled upon without a Hearing
if delay would seriously injure a party, or if it involves a matter which can be
decided without oral argument or the presentation of testimony.
(c) Ruling
The Director of Investigations, the Hearing Commissioner or other Commission
staff designated by a Commissioner or the Executive Director shall act upon a
motion when all parties have responded thereto, or the deadline for response has
passed, whichever comes first. Whenever practicable, a ruling on a motion shall
be made within seven (7) days.
2.08 Disposition
(a) Issuance of Final Investigative Report and Notifications
(1) Probable Cause: When a finding of Probable Cause is made, a copy
of the signed Final Investigative Report (See Section 2.05(d)(2) herein)
shall be sent immediately to the Complainant and Respondent by certified
mail, return receipt requested or by personal service. In addition, the
parties shall be notified concerning their option to elect a court action as
29
an alternative to an administrative Public Hearing, in accordance with the
provisions of Section 2.08(d) and Section 2.09, and the provision for
Reconsideration pursuant to Section 2.08(b) herein.
(2) No Probable Cause: When a finding of No Probable Cause, No
Jurisdiction or Closed Administratively is made, a copy of the signed Final
Investigative Report (See Section 2.05(d)) shall be sent within ten (10)
days to the Complainant and the Respondent by certified mail, return
receipt requested or by personal service, and the Executive Director shall
dismiss the complaint. In addition, the parties shall be notified concerning
the provision for appeal pursuant to Section 2.08(c) herein.
(b) Reconsideration of Probable Cause
The Commission may reconsider a Probable Cause finding at any time upon the
recommendation of the Director of Investigations or other Commission staff
designated by a Commissioner or the Executive Director. If the Executive
Director or a Commissioner concludes that the Commission's files do not indicate
the existence of evidence sufficient to meet the standard set forth in Section
1.02(dd), the Executive Director or a Commissioner shall, after notice to the
parties, set a date for a Conference to consider the reversal of the finding. At said
Conference, the Commission will accept affidavits or other indications of new
evidence from the parties, as well as memoranda of law. An Order, signed by the
Executive Director or a Commissioner, shall result from the Conference. Such
Order may:
(1) Reverse the Probable Cause finding and require service upon the
parties of a finding of No Probable Cause;
(2) Reopen the case for further investigation;
(3) Affirm the Probable Cause finding;
(4) Modify the Probable Cause finding; or
(5) Require such other action as is deemed necessary in the interests of
justice.
30
(c) Request for Preliminary Hearing
When a finding of No Probable Cause, No Jurisdiction, or Closed
Administratively is made, and issued in accordance with Section 2.08(a)(2)
herein, the Complainant may appeal the finding as follows:
(1) Within ten (10) days of receipt of the Final Investigative Report in
which such a finding has been made, the Complainant may appeal the
finding by filing with the Commission a written Request for Preliminary
Hearing.
(2) Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a Request for Preliminary
Hearing, an individual Commissioner shall be assigned and shall preside at
such a Hearing at which the Complainant may present evidence and oral or
written reasons why the finding is in error. The Respondent may not,
except as permitted by the Hearing Commissioner, present testimony or
oral argument, but may submit a written statement. Within ten (10) days
after such Hearing, the Commissioner shall affirm, reverse, or modify the
finding, stating his/her reasons therefor. A decision affirming the finding
shall become a Final Commission Order only after adoption pursuant to
Section 2.09 (s), below.
(d) Election of Civil Action or Provision of Administrative Proceeding
If a Probable Cause finding is issued, a Complainant or Respondent, or an
aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint is filed may elect to have the
claims asserted in the Final Investigative Report decided in a court of competent
jurisdiction, as an alternative to an administrative proceeding, i.e. Public Hearing
before the Commission in accordance with Section 2.09 herein.
(1) The election must be in writing and filed no later than twenty (20)
days after the receipt of a Probable Cause finding. The person making
such an election must file the notice of election with the Executive
Director of the Commission and send the notice of election to all other
Complainants and Respondents to whom the Probable Cause finding
relates.
31
(2) If a timely election is made, a Commissioner, the Executive
Director, the Director of Investigations or other Commission staff
designated by a Commissioner or the Executive Director shall immediately
notify the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (“MCAD”).
If the MCAD also finds Probable Cause, it shall immediately notify the
Office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
who, within thirty (30) days after election is made under MGL c. 151B,
shall commence and maintain a civil action on behalf of the aggrieved
person. Upon receipt of such notice, the Commission shall dismiss the
complaint pending before it and the Complainant shall be barred from
subsequently bringing a complaint on the same matter before the
Commission. The Director of Investigations, or other Commission staff
designated by a Commissioner or the Executive Director, shall be
available for consultation on any legal issues raised by the Attorney
General as to how best to proceed in the event that a new court decision or
newly discovered evidence is regarded as relevant to the Probable Cause
finding. This civil action shall be maintained in accordance with MGL c.
151B, Section 5. Accordingly, the Complainant may intervene as of right
in said civil action. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing
practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may grant appropriate
injunctive relief, compensatory and punitive damages and attorney's fees
and costs.
(4) If a timely election is not made under this subsection, the Commission,
through its Director of Investigations or other Commission staff
designated by a Commissioner or the Executive Director, will maintain
an administrative proceeding in accordance with the procedures in
Section 2.09 herein.
32
2.09 Public Hearing
(a) Certification to a Public Hearing
Following the issuance of a finding of Probable Cause, the expiration of the
twenty (20) day period without the making of a timely election pursuant to
Section 2.08(d) herein, and within the same twenty (20) days, a finding by
Commission staff or notification by either party that reasonable conciliation
efforts have been unsuccessful, a Commissioner or the Executive Director shall
issue a certificate instructing the Director of Investigations or other Commission
staff to schedule the case for Public Hearing. The Hearing shall be scheduled to
commence within one hundred twenty (120) days of the issuance of the Probable
Cause finding. A copy of the certificate and notice of the date, time, and place of
the Hearing shall be sent to each party by certified mail, return receipt requested.
A matter may also be certified to a Public Hearing pursuant to Section 2.06(e)
herein.
(b) Hearing Commissioner
(1) Upon scheduling a case for Public Hearing, one or more Hearing
Commissioners shall be assigned to preside over the case. At no time may
a Commissioner who has participated in an investigation of that complaint
be assigned to preside at the Public Hearing of that case.
(2) Hearing Commissioners shall be under a duty to conduct a fair
Hearing and to take all necessary action to avoid delay and maintain order.
They shall have all powers necessary to these ends including (but not
limited to) the following (A) Administrative Powers and (B) Enforcement
Powers:
(A) Administrative Powers include the power to:
(i) Arrange and issue notice of the date, time and place
of the Hearing(s), or upon due notice to all parties,
to change the date, time, or place of Hearing(s)
previously set;
33
(ii) Hold Conferences to settle, simplify, or establish
issues in a proceeding, or to consider other matters
that may aid in the expeditious disposition of
proceedings;
(iii) Require parties to state their position with respect to
various issues in connection with the proceedings;
(iv) Determine the scope of discovery;
(v) Administer oaths or affirmations;
(vi) Rule on motions and other procedural items;
(vii) Regulate the course of the Hearing and the conduct
of counsel;
(viii) Examine witnesses and direct witnesses to testify;
(ix) Receive, rule on and limit evidence;
(x) Establish the time for filing motions, petitions,
briefs or other matters;
(xi) Issue initial or interim decisions, recommendations
or final decisions.
(B) Enforcement Powers are as follows:
(i) Issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum;
(ii) Grant compensatory damages, including damages
for emotional distress;
(iii) Assess civil penalties, in the amounts prescribed by
Section 2.09(u)(4);
(iv) Issue cease and desist Orders;
(v) Seek, in court, preliminary, temporary and/or
injunctive relief against a Respondent, including
Orders or Decrees restraining and enjoining the
selling, renting or otherwise making unavailable to
the Complainant of any housing accommodations
with respect to which the complaint is made;
34
(vi) Seek, at agency expense, in court, an award of
punitive damages and/or reasonable attorney's fees
and costs;
(vii) Take any action authorized by the Ordinance, the
Statute, as amended, or these Regulations, as
amended.
(3) When more than one Hearing Commissioner is assigned to preside,
a single Hearing Commissioner shall be designated to rule on all Pre-
hearing matters.
(c) Respondent's Answer
(1) Respondent shall, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice
of Public Hearing file a written answer with the Commission, and shall
serve by regular mail a copy of the answer upon the Complainant(s), and
certification of such service shall be a prerequisite to filing with the
Commission.
(2) The answer shall contain appropriate identification of the
Complainant(s) and Respondent(s), including but not limited to, their
names, addresses and representatives if any. The Respondent shall state in
the answer, in short and plain terms, his/her defenses to each claim
asserted, and shall admit or deny the averments upon which the complaint
is based. If he/she is without knowledge or information sufficient to form
a belief as to the truth of an averment, he/she shall so state, which
statement shall have the effect of a denial. Any averment not answered
shall be deemed admitted.
(d) Pre-Hearing Conference
A Hearing Commissioner, prior to commencement of the Public Hearing, may
conduct a Pre-hearing Conference with the parties or their representatives, and
may issue Pre- Hearing Orders concerning any of the following matters:
(1) Stipulations;
(2) Discovery;
35
(3) Motions;
(4) Witnesses;
(5) Identification of facts and issues in dispute;
(6) Submission of legal memoranda in support of a party's position;
(7) Any other matter, which in the judgment of the Hearing
Commissioner, is likely to expedite the case.
(e) Continuances
Any party requesting a continuance shall file a written request with the
commission and shall provide all other parties with a copy of the request. A
Hearing Commissioner shall grant or deny the request as the interests of justice
require.
(f) Settlement after Commencement of Public Hearing
In cases settled after the commencement of Public Hearings, the Hearing
Commissioners, at their discretion, may assess costs including but not limited to
sheriff's fees and stenographer services to any or all parties. If the case has been
settled after conclusion of the Hearing, the Commission, through its Director of
Investigations, the Corporation Counsel, or other Commission staff designated by
a Commissioner or the Executive Director, may arrange for the award of
reasonable attorney's fees and costs, consistent with the Statute, Section 7(4).
(g) Default
(1) Entry of default Order. Whenever any party properly served with a
notice of Public Hearing fails to obtain a continuance and fails to appear,
either in person or by representative, the Hearing Commissioner(s) shall
enter his/her default. Notice of default shall be sent to all parties and their
counsel.
(2) Vacating Entry of default. Within fifteen (15) days after entry of
default, upon written petition, a Hearing Commissioner may vacate the
default and reopen the case for good cause shown.
36
(3) Final Commission Order. Thirty (30) days after entry of default, if
there is no petition by the party in default, the Hearing Commissioner(s)
shall report to the full Commission pursuant to Section 2.09(s), below.
(h) Discovery
(1) Parties shall be allowed to conduct reasonable discovery. A
request for discovery shall be directed in writing to the Commission. A
Hearing Commissioner shall issue an Order to respond to discovery as
requested or he or she may modify the request as the interests of justice
may require. A discovery Order shall be responded to in full within
twenty (20) days after mailing or shall be objected to, with specific reasons
stated, within ten (10) days after mailing.
(2) Discovery available to the parties shall include:
i. No more than thirty (30) interrogatories;
ii. Requests for Admissions;
iii. Requests for Documents; and
iv. Depositions.
(3) Noncompliance with a discovery Order shall constitute an
admission that the interrogatories or requests for admissions, if answered,
would have established facts in accordance with the claim of the
requesting party.
(i) Subpoenas
(1) Any party may compel the attendance and testimony of a witness at
the Public Hearing and the production of evidence by filing a request with
a Hearing Commissioner for a subpoena as authorized by the Ordinance.
Fees and other costs in connection with such subpoena shall normally be
borne by the requesting party, although the Hearing Commissioner shall
waive such fees and costs if the party is indigent or for other good cause.
(2) The Commission may compel the attendance and testimony of a
witness and the production of evidence at any point in the investigative
37
process by filing a request with an individual Commissioner for a
subpoena as authorized by the Ordinance.
(3) Subpoenas shall be issued in the name of the Commission by an
individual Commissioner.
(4) Any witnesses subpoenaed may request in writing that the
subpoena be vacated or modified. A single Commissioner other than the
Issuing Commissioner shall review the subpoena and, after such
investigation as he or she considers appropriate, may grant the request in
whole or in part if the interests of fairness and justice so require.
(5) Upon the failure of any person to comply with a subpoena issued
pursuant to these Regulations and not vacated or modified, the
Commission may apply to an appropriate state or municipal court for an
Order requiring compliance
(j) Transcript and Record
(1) All testimony and arguments offered at a Public Hearing shall be
either transcribed by stenographer retained by the parties or recorded by
the Commission's electronic recording equipment.
(2) Any party to a Hearing may have a private stenographer present at
any Hearing provided that a copy of any such private transcript be
furnished to the Commission within twenty (20) days of its completion.
(3) A party desiring a copy of the electronic tape of a Hearing shall so
request in writing and bear the expense of copying.
(4) In addition to the tape or written transcript of the Hearing, the
record shall consist of the complaint, answer, stipulations, exhibits in
evidence and any motions (and the dispositions thereof) filed after
certification to Public Hearing.
(k) Stipulations
Written stipulations may be introduced in evidence if signed by the persons
sought to be bound thereby or by their representatives. Oral stipulations may be
made on the record during a Public Hearing.
38
(l) Evidence
In proceedings before the Commission, the Massachusetts law of evidence shall
apply. The Commission adopts Rule 803(8) of the Federal Rules of Evidence
which permits the admission as an exception to the hearsay rule, of records,
reports, statements or data compilations of public agencies setting forth factual
findings resulting from an investigation made pursuant to authority granted by
law, unless the source of the information indicates a lack of trustworthiness.
(m) Administrative Notice
The Commission may take administrative notice of matters as might be judicially
noticed by the courts of the United States or of the Commonwealth and of
technical or general facts within its specialized areas of knowledge.
(n) Oral Argument
The Commission may allow the parties reasonable time for oral argument either
prior to or at the close of evidence presented during the Hearing.
(o) Witnesses
Either party, or the Hearing Commissioner(s), may call witnesses to testify during
the proceeding. Each party, and the Commissioner(s), shall have the opportunity
to cross-examine any witness called to testify.
(p) Briefs and Proposed Findings of Fact
Briefs and proposed findings of fact may be filed by parties or by any interested
persons before or during the course of a Hearing or within such time thereafter as
the Commissioner may designate.
(q) Other Submissions
The Commission may allow the parties, after a showing of good cause, to file
evidentiary documents or exhibits within a reasonable time after completion of the
Hearing. Copies of any document or exhibit which is allowed to be so filed shall
be sent to all other parties. The Hearing Commissioner(s) may also require on
their own motion that the parties file evidentiary documents or exhibits
subsequent to the completion of the Hearing.
39
(r) Assessments of Costs
Costs may be assessed by the Commission pursuant to Section 2.09(f) and (i),
above.
(s) Final Commissioner Order
Within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the Hearing, the Hearing
Commissioner(s) shall report to the full Commission detailed Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law, and shall recommend to the Commission a Final Decision
and Order. The Commission may adopt, by vote of three (3) Commissioners, the
Findings and Order of the Hearing Commissioner(s) as a Final Commission Order
or it may remand the matter to the Hearing Commissioner(s) for further
consideration. If the Hearing Commissioner(s) concludes that the charges of
discriminatory conduct by the Respondent cannot be substantiated, and the
Commission concurs, the case shall be dismissed with prejudice. The parties shall
be notified in writing of the decision. The Commission shall make public
disclosure of each Final Order.
(t) Enforcement Powers after Public Hearing
Upon finding after Public Hearing that a person has violated or is in violation of
the Ordinance or these Regulations, as amended, the Commission may, based
upon Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law:
(1) Order that such person cease and desist from illegal activity;
(2) Take appropriate remedial action in the interests of the
Complainant or the general public;
(3) Award compensatory damages, including damages for emotional
distress;
(4) Assess a civil penalty against the Respondent in the following
amounts as prescribed by the Statute, Section 7(2):
(i) In an amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars if the
Respondent has not been adjudged to have committed a
prior discriminatory housing practice;
40
(ii) In an amount not to exceed twenty five thousand dollars if
the Respondent has been adjudged to have committed one
(1) other discriminatory housing practice during the five (5)
year period ending on the date of the filing of the
complaint; and
(iii) In an amount not to exceed fifty thousand dollars if the
Respondent has been adjudged to have committed two (2)
or more discriminatory housing practices during the seven
(7) year period ending on the date of the filing of the
complaint.
(5) Arrange to have adjudicated in court, at the Commission's expense,
the award of punitive damages and the allowance of reasonable attorney's
fees and costs to the prevailing aggrieved party unless special
circumstances make the recovery of such fees and costs unjust. The
plaintiff alleging violations of these Regulations shall be liable for
attorney's fees and costs only to the extent where his/her participation was
frivolous, vexatious or for the purpose of harassment;
(6) Seek, in court, preliminary, temporary and or injunctive relief
against a Respondent, including orders or decrees restraining and
enjoining the selling, renting or otherwise making unavailable to the
Complainant of any housing accommodations with respect to which the
complaint is made and/or;
(7) Take affirmative action in the interests of fair housing in Boston
(See Section 2.11 for Judicial Enforcement).
(u) Disposition of Complaint
The Commission shall make a final administrative disposition of the complaint
within one (1) year of the date of receipt of the complaint, unless it is
impracticable to do so. If the Commission is unable to do so, it shall notify the
Complainant and Respondent in writing and state the reasons for the delay.
41
2.10 Judicial Review
(a) The Complainant, Respondent or other person aggrieved by a Final Commission
Order may seek review of such Order by filing a petition in an appropriate Trial
Court of the Commonwealth pursuant to Section 8 of the Statute, as explained
below, Mass. Gen. Laws, chapter 214, chapter 231A, chapter 185C or other law
conferring jurisdiction. The Commission may designate its own counsel, or City
of Boston Corporation Counsel or counsel of the party who prevailed in
Commission proceedings as agent of the Commission for the purpose of
defending the decision upon judicial review.
(b) Judicial review of a Final Commission Order issued pursuant to Section 8 of the
Statute, shall be in Suffolk Superior Court or the Boston Housing Court
department of the Trial Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which
shall have the authority to grant to any party such temporary relief, Restraining
Order, or other Order as the Court determines is just and proper.
(c) The reviewing Court shall affirm, modify or set aside the Order in whole or in
part, or remand the Order for further proceedings. The Court shall also enforce
the Order to the extent to which it is affirmed or modified.
2.11 Judicial Enforcement
The Executive Director, a party to a Consent Order, Conciliation Agreement or Pre-
determination Settlement Agreement or a person affected by a Final Commission Order
may file a Request for Enforcement with the Commission alleging non-compliance with
such Agreement or Order. The Commission shall use its best efforts to bring about
compliance by filing a petition in an appropriate Trial Court of the Commonwealth
pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws chapter 214, chapter 231A, chapter 185C or other law
conferring jurisdiction, or by referral to the Massachusetts Commission Against
Discrimination, or may appear in an enforcement proceeding by its own counsel, or City
of Boston Corporation Counsel, for the purpose of obtaining enforcement.
2.12 Private Enforcement
(a) Pursuant to Section 9 of the Statute, within two years of the occurrence or
termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice prohibited by these
42
Regulations, or breach of a Conciliation Agreement, whichever occurs last, an
aggrieved person may file a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for
equitable relief including temporary or permanent injunctions, and/or legal relief,
including compensatory damages, punitive damages and attorney's fees and costs.
Upon receipt of proof of service upon a Respondent of a summons and complaint
also filed in such court, the Commission may cease administrative procedures
pertaining to the underlying allegation. In no instance shall the period during
which said statute of limitations runs include the time consumed by administrative
proceedings before the Commission.
(b) Pursuant to M.G.L. chapter 151B, Section 9, an aggrieved party may file a civil
action in state court for equitable and/or legal relief within three (3) years of the
occurrence or termination of an alleged discriminatory practice. Upon receipt of
proof of service upon a Respondent of a summons and complaint, the
Commission may cease administrative procedures. The three (3) year statute of
limitations includes the time consumed by administrative proceedings.
(c) Pursuant to M.G.L. chapter 151B, Section 9, an aggrieved party may file a civil
action in state court for equitable and/or legal relief within one (1) year of the
occurrence or termination of an alleged discriminatory practice if the aggrieved
party has not filed a complaint at the Commission or other administrative agency.
2.13 Licensing of Brokers/Realtors
(a) Upon an entry of a Final Order under Section 2.09(s) herein, as against a licensed
real estate agent or broker, or corporation or partnership or individual doing
business as an agent or broker of real property which includes a finding that said
person committed a practice prohibited by the Ordinance or these Regulations, the
Executive Director shall, at the direction of the Commissioners approving said
Final Order, deliver to the appropriate licensing bodies and professional
associations governing said profession a copy of said Order.
(b) In the event that a Final Order enters against a banking or lending organization or
person engaged in such business, the Executive Director shall in the same manner
as (1) above deliver to the appropriate bank regulatory bodies a copy of said Order.
43
REGULATION 3: NOTICE TO BE GIVEN BY REAL ESTATE BROKERS,
SALESPEOPLE, TITLE INSURANCE COMPANIES, AND LAWYERS: RECORDS TO BE
RETAINED
3.01 Giving of Notice to Tenants and Buyers
Every real estate broker or salesperson handling transactions pertaining to property
covered in Section 1.03 within the City of Boston shall give to every prospective tenant or
buyer of property subject to these Regulations who inquires about or solicits the services
of such broker or salesperson, a notice in writing, to be supplied by the Commission, in a
form substantially as follows:
I. In the City of Boston, IT IS AGAINST THE LAW to discriminate against
any person because of race, color, religion, marital status, military status,
handicap, children, national origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual orientation or source
of income in the sale or rental of housing.
II. If you believe that you have been denied equal access to any housing, or
have been discriminated against, YOU HAVE THE RIGHT to file a complaint
with the Boston Fair Housing Commission within one hundred-eighty (180) days
after the occurrence or termination of the discrimination.
III. The Boston Fair Housing Commission will investigate at no charge all
complaints of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination in the area of
housing. The Commission may be contacted by writing to:
Boston Fair Housing Commission
One City Hall Plaza, Room 966
Boston, MA 02201
or by calling: 617 635-4408
3.02 Giving of Notice to Lessors and Sellers
Every real estate broker or salesperson handling transactions pertaining to property
covered in Section 1.03 within the City of Boston shall give to every owner, seller, or
lessor of property subject to these Regulations who lists with said broker or salesperson, a
44
notice in writing to be supplied by the Boston Fair Housing Commission, in a form
substantially as follows:
I. The sale or rental of your property is governed by the City of Boston Code,
Ordinances, Title 10, Sections 150-157 (1982), as amended and St. 1994, c.37, as
amended. It prohibits the denial of equal access to and discrimination in housing
(regardless of the public or private source of such denial or discrimination) where
such denial or discrimination is based on race, color, religious creed, marital
status, handicap, military status, children, national origin, sex, age, ancestry,
sexual orientation or source of income.
II. Under the Ordinance and the Statute:
(1) Neither you nor your broker may discriminate in the sale or
rental of housing.
(2) Your broker is prohibited from accepting or retaining any listings
with the understanding that illegal discrimination may be practiced.
(3) Neither you nor your broker may engage in activities such as
inquiring as to race, color, religious creed, marital status, handicap,
military status, children, national origin, sex, age, ancestry, sexual
orientation or source of income over the telephone, establishing quotas,
giving false or misleading information to a perspective tenant or applicant,
or steering people in those categories to particular neighborhoods, houses
or apartments.
(4) Harassment of you and your broker because of your compliance
with the Fair Housing Ordinance is also prohibited.
(5) The Boston Fair Housing Commission will investigate all
complaints of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, and discrimination in the
area of housing.
3.03 Housing Records to be Retained
(a) All real estate brokers, agents, management agents, owners and others subject to
these Regulations, if they prepare or ask others to prepare certain documents in the
course of business, shall retain those records for one hundred-eighty (180) days
45
following an initial inquiry or application for housing, provided, however, that if a
complaint has been filed with the Commission against such persons, these records
must be retained until final finding by the Commission and the courts. Those
records include: All applications, leases, records, documents or data pertaining to
the rental, lease or sale of housing.
(b) The records described in Section 3.03(a) shall be made available during business
hours for inspection by authorized representatives of the Commission and are
subject to subpoena by the Commission.
3.04 Enforcement
Failure to give notice or maintain records as required by this regulation shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of a discriminatory housing practice.
I certify and attest that the above is a true copy of the Proposed Amended Regulations of
the Boston Fair Housing Commission which were approved for comment and a Public
Hearing by official act of the Commission at its meeting (Public Hearing not held yet).
________________ ________________________________
Date Chairman
Boston Fair Housing Commission
