SOURCE: https://www.wgbh.org/news/politics/2026-06-23/rent-control-question-disqualified-due-to-religious-exemption
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 21:00 UTC
JURISDICTION: MA
TYPE: secondary (news report)
NOTE: NEWS REPORT (State House News Service via WGBH, June 23, 2026) on the Supreme Judicial Court ruling in Cella v. Attorney General, SJC-13893. The starter-pack source D059 is also a news report (WBUR, link-only); the court's opinion and docket pages block automated access.

State House News Service

June 23, 2026

Massachusetts voters will not have the opportunity to repeal the state’s three-decade ban on rent control on November’s ballot.

The Supreme Judicial Court ruled Tuesday morning that the initiative petition seeking to impose statewide rent control “impermissibly” relates to religion and religious institutions, which are among the matters the state Constitution sets as out of bounds from the initiative petition process.

Attorney General Andrea Campbell’s summary of the petition states that it “would not apply to ... units operated for educational, religious, or non-profit purposes.” The plaintiffs claimed the petition should be disqualified because “religion is a factor in the application of the law,” citing a legal precedent that is key to the court’s ruling.

Support for GBH is provided by:

Become a GBH sponsor

“The petition ... concerns a generally secular subject matter -- rent control. But, by including an express exemption for facilities operated solely for religious purposes, the petition impermissibly makes religion ”a factor in [the petition’s] application.“ And in order to enforce the proposed law, the exemption would require the government to determine if a facility is ”operated solely for . . . religious . . . purposes,“ and then make an enforcement decision based on the facility’s religious purpose (or lack thereof),” Justice Frank Gaziano wrote. “Further, the petition would confer preferential treatment on religious institutions by allowing them to increase rent prices, while limiting rent increases for secular facilities.”

Campbell had certified the question for the ballot, using a process that she has called “stupid” and said needs to be “revamped.” Her office had argued that the petition was just a rent control matter.

“It’s not about religious matters or religious subjects in the ways that mattered to the delegates at the Convention, or the ways that this court has discussed in its cases,” Assistant Attorney General Phoebe Fischer-Groban argued before the court last month.

As a result of legal challenges like the one to the rent control initiative and advisory opinions requested by the Senate, the SJC has had an active hand in shaping the November 2026 ballot.

The court has swatted away legal challenges and ruled that petitions that would undo the 2016 legalization of recreational marijuana and switch the state to a single all-party primary election structure can continue their journeys to go before voters on Nov. 4.

The justices sided with plaintiffs in another challenge, ruling that a question to cut the state income tax rate could not stay on the ballot as a result of Campbell’s faulty summary of the measure. A proposal to overhaul how legislative stipends are dished out and tie them to internal procedural benchmarks was scuttled after the SJC said in an advisory opinion requested by the Senate that the measure crossed a constitutional line.

Support for GBH is provided by:

Become a GBH sponsor

The rent control question was the last of this year’s ballot questions still pending with the SJC.

“Today the Supreme Judicial Court confirmed that the nation’s most extreme rent control proposal was unconstitutional. While we firmly believe that Massachusetts voters were prepared to vote ‘no’ in November, today’s decision puts the issue to rest and protects our housing pipeline and our communities from the proven damage that rent control inflicts,” Conor Yunits, chair and spokesman for the Housing for Massachusetts committee formed to oppose the ballot question, said.

Supporters of the question saw it as instituting a needed lid on rising tenant costs that are a major contributor to the affordability woes facing residents. Gov. Maura Healey and legislative leaders opposed the proposal, echoing claims by the real estate industry that controls on rent would discourage needed housing production.

[This is a developing story]

Colin A. Young | State House News Service

Explore Topics:

Election 2026

Support for GBH is provided by:

Become a GBH sponsor

All new app!

All the news you trust, now with more audio and video.

Subscribe to GBH Daily

Your essential daily newsletter delivering trusted news, local insights, ways to connect, and can't miss programs from Boston and beyond.

All Newsletters

Privacy Policy

Apparel, totes, stickers, and more.

get your swag

Top News

911 call, witness account raise more questions about car crash involving Worcester city councilor

City Councilor Kathleen Toomey has said she was not impaired when she struck a parked vehicle around midnight Sept. 2.

Related Stories:

Worcester police face scrutiny over response to crash involving city councilor

Worcester City Council says no to creating police oversight board

Worcester strikes back against racist bullying in school sports

Mass. public defenders push for union rights on November ballot

Related Stories:

Public defenders bring fight for unionization to Beacon Hill

Mass. watchdog calls public defense system ‘broken’

Lawmakers plan raises for bar advocates, but it may not be enough to get them back to work

Union sues EPA and its administrator over termination of contract

More Politics

Mike Minogue makes case for Mass. governor bid: More affordability, fewer ICE raids

House budget chief cool to Healey's gas tax suspension

Democrats accuse Susan Collins of 'corruption' following report on alleged pay-to-play scheme

Did Macklemore’s ouster violate the First Amendment? One watchdog says maybe.

Related Stories:

Ed Sheeran’s tour in trouble after opening acts drop out in solidarity with rapper Macklemore

Bob Kraft explains decision to urge ouster of rapper Macklemore from Ed Sheeran tour

ABOUT

About GBH

Kids & Education

Services

Careers

Press

SUPPORT GBH

Support GBH

Donate

Membership

Corporate Sponsorship

Directed Giving

Planned Giving

Other Ways to Support

Shop GBH

POLICIES

Terms of use

Editorial Guidelines

Privacy Policy

Accessibility Statement

Reports & Filings

EEO Public File (2025)

Assistance with Public Files

All FCC Public Files

WGBH-TV

WGBX-TV

WFXZ-CD

WGBH-FM

WCRB-FM

CONNECT WITH US

Contact GBH

Contact GBH News

Media Inquiries

Newsletters

Visit Us

Follow GBH

Follow GBH News

What matters to you.

© 2026 WGBH. All rights reserved. 

Our Partners

Your Cookie/VPPA Settings

You are leaving GBH.org

You are leaving gbh.org and going to a web page that is not owned by GBH. If you are streaming, your experience will be interrupted.

Stay on GBH.org

Continue to external site

Always continue to external site. Do not show this message again.
