SOURCE: https://www.newarknj.gov/255/Division-of-Rent-Control
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 21:00 UTC
JURISDICTION: Newark, NJ
NOTE: Official City of Newark Division of Rent Control page quoting Newark Municipal Code 19:2-3. Captured for starter-pack link-only source D070 (ecode360 36623772).

Skip to Main Content 

Create a Website Account - Manage notification subscriptions, save form progress and more. 

Website Sign In

Government 

Departments 

Living & Visiting 

Business 

How Do I... 

Search

Building Code, Newark & State 

Guides 

Intake Form 

Multiple Dwellings Application (PDF) 

Rent Registration Statement (PDF) 

Home

Departments

Economic & Housing Development

Division of Rent Control

Division of Rent Control 

The Office of Rent Control assists landlords and tenants in understanding the impact that the Municipal Rent Control Ordinance of the City of Newark may have on their properties and apartments. Technical assistance is provided on a wide variety of rental issues which cover such matters as: 

Which apartments are subject to local rent control laws

What is the legal base rent

What rent increases the law permits

Tax surcharges; water/sewer surcharges

Major new improvement surcharges

Hardship increases

Annual registration requirements

Files on all residential properties are maintained for public inspection if owners and/or tenants have questions regarding a particular property.

What We Do and Don't Do

The Newark Rent Ordinance regulates rents for certain residential rental units in Newark, New Jersey. There is no commercial rent control in Newark.

The Rent Control Board's primary function is to conduct hearings and mediation of tenant and landlord petitions regarding the adjustment of rents under the City's rent control laws.

The Rent Control Board cannot arbitrate matters that are not part of the Title 19, Chapter 2, Rent Control Regulations, Rent Control Board, of the Revised General Ordinances of the City of Newark. For example, we do not have jurisdiction to adjudicate alleged breaches of a rental agreement, which must be decided in court. The Rent Control Board also cannot hear cases concerning issues of discrimination, harassment, or retaliation, as such matters are outside of our jurisdiction. Please contact the Department of Community Affairs regarding these issues.

The Rent Control Board provides counseling information on subjects that are covered by the Rent Ordinance only. Please understand that our staff cannot give legal advice, and they are instructed to let you know when your question is one that should properly be answered by a lawyer.

While we cannot refer you to individual attorneys, our staff will be glad to direct you to the appropriate resources for advice and assistance. A list of these resources is available through the referral listing on our website. Please note that you do not need a lawyer to file a petition at the Rent Control Office.

Due to high demand and a limited number of staff, there can sometimes be delays in speaking with a representative. It is helpful if you have your questions written down before you speak with a representative.

Important Announcements

The Rent Control Ordinance was amended on September 05, 2017. Please see Rent Control Certified Ordinance 6PSF-(a) 090517 (PDF).

Office of Rent Control Frequently Asked Questions - FAQ 
English (PDF)

Spanish (PDF)

Executive Order MEO-20-0004 (PDF)

Rent Registration Form (PDF)

Rent Control Board Hearing Schedule for 2025 (PDF)

Attention Tenants & Landlords

The rents for any housing space shall not be increased more than the percentages stated below in any consecutive 12-month period, irrespective of the number of different tenants occupying the housing space during the 12-month period, any change of ownership of the Landlord or vacancy of the housing space. This provision does not preclude a tenant from challenging the legality of the rent being charged immediately prior to an increase authorized by the Rent Control Ordinance.

For example, if the legal base rent is currently $1,000, and the rent is increased in January 2015, the permissible rent increase is 1.3% ($1,000 times 1.3% equals $13). The new base rent is $1,013.

On May 13, 2020, Mayor Ras J. Baraka signed Executive Order MEO-20-0004, declaring a moratorium on all rent increases for rent-controlled units. This order temporarily suspends rent increases, preventing any increase in rent on properties covered by the Rent Control Ordinance, and shall remain in effect throughout the state of emergency and until no later than two months thereafter. The moratorium is retroactive to April 1, 2020.

Mayor Ras J. Baraka rescinded the aforementioned executive order on September 18, 2023, adding that the rental increase calculation shall not be retroactive. Calculations for rental increase during the moratorium shall be 0%.

Pursuant to 19:2-3. Rent Increases. 19:2-3.1. Determination of Rents. In no case shall the allowable rent increase exceed 4%. The allowable annual increase will not be permitted, if the dwelling is not in substantial compliance and/or if the landlord has not met the registration requirements as specified in this subsection 19:2-9.8. (Ord. 6 PSF-A(S), 9-5-17)

If you have questions about the Newark Rent Control Ordinance, please contact our office or feel free to visit us at the website listed.

Contact Us

Office of Rent Control / Rent Regulation Officer

Email Rent Control

Physical Address 
View Map 

920 Mayor Kenneth A Gibson Boulevard

Room 111

Newark, NJ 07102 

920 Mayor Kenneth A Gibson Boulevard Room 111 Newark NJ 07102

Directions 

Phone: 973-733-3675

Fax: 973-733-6366

Office Hours

8:30 am to 4:30 pm

Directory

Forms

Multiple Dwelling Application (PDF) 

Rent Registration Statement April 2025 (PDF) 

Documents

2025 Rent Control Board Public Hearing Schedule (PDF) 

Rent Control FAQ - English (PDF) 

Rent Control FAQ - Spanish (PDF) 

Rent Control Certified Ordinance 091118 (PDF) 

Rent Control Certified Ordinance 6PSF-(a) 090517 (PDF) 

MEO-23-000X Rescinding Moratorium on Rent Increase Effective September 18, 2023 (PDF) 

Recreation Programs, Parks, Facilities & Events Learn More 

Legal / Public Notices

Notices & Updates Learn More 

Job OpportunitiesCity Jobs & NewarkWORKS Jobs Learn More 

Report an IssueSubmit Solid Waste Issues & More Learn More 

PayParking Ticket, Taxes
Water Bill Learn More 

Vital Statistics
Vital Records for Birth, Marriage, Death Learn More 

Contact Us

City of Newark
City Hall
920 Mayor Kenneth A. Gibson Blvd
Newark, NJ 07102

Phone: 973-733-4311

Quick Links

City Mayor 

City Council 

Events 

FAQs 

News 

/QuickLinks.aspx

Footer Links

Home 

Site Map 

Contact Us 

Accessibility 

Copyright Notices 

/QuickLinks.aspx

Loading

Loading 

Do Not Show Again 
Close 

Arrow Left 

Arrow Right 

[]

Slideshow Left Arrow 

Slideshow Right Arrow
